Object Oriented Programming 
CEUE203 
Comprehensive University Study Module 
Modules 1–10  |  Java Programming 
Instructor: Mr. Sagar M. Patel 
Teaching Scheme: 2 Hrs Theory + 2 Hrs Practical | 3 Credits | 100 Marks 
How to Use This Module 
This document is structured for exam-oriented study. Each module covers Learning Objectives, 
Core Concepts with full explanations, Key Definitions, Exam Questions, and a Summary. Topics 
marked with ⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY are critical for university examinations. Use Section 
9 for exam practice and Section 7 for last-day revision. 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Module 1 — Introduction & Teaching Scheme 
Module 2 — Introduction to Java Programming 
Module 3 — Class Fundamentals 
Module 4 — String Handling 
Module 5 — Inheritance, Interfaces & Packages 
Module 6 — Functional Interfaces & Lambda Expressions 
Module 7 — Exception Handling 
Module 8 — Multithreaded Programming 
Module 9 — File NIO 
Module 10 — Collection Framework & Generics 
3 
4 
8 
14 
18 
27 
31 
37 
44 
49 
MODULE 1 — Introduction & Teaching Scheme 
Module 1: Introduction & Teaching Scheme 
1. Learning Objectives 
• Understand the structure and evaluation scheme of the OOP course. 
• Know the distribution of marks across theory, practicals, and external examination. 
• Identify self-study and MOOC requirements for successful course completion. 
2. Course Overview 
Object Oriented Programming (CEUE203) is a foundational computer science course that introduces 
students to Java programming through the lens of object-oriented design. The course runs for 4 hours 
per week (2 hours theory + 2 hours practical) and carries 3 academic credits, totalling 100 marks. 
3. Teaching & Evaluation Scheme 
Component 
Sub-Component 
Marks 
Internal (50) 
Notes 
Theory Exam 
25 
Internal theory + 2 best-of-3 quizzes + 
1 assignment 
Internal (50) 
Practical 
25 
Practical Exam (10) + Term Work (10) 
+ MOOC (5) 
External (50) 
University Theory 
25 
External (50) 
End-semester university exam 
University Practical 
25 
Viva + Practical examination 
4. Self-Study Components 
The course includes a structured self-study component assessed through practical exercises drawn 
from the Striver A2Z DSA Course. Students are expected to complete the following: 
• Step 1 — Learn the Basics: Study Java fundamentals (variables, data types, control flow, 
functions). 
• Step 3 — Arrays: Solve easy, medium, and hard level problems on arrays as listed in the 
DSA course. 
• MOOC Course: Complete an approved online course (e.g., Coursera, NPTEL) for 5 additional 
internal marks. 
Quick Tip 
Start the MOOC course in the first two weeks of the semester. Certificates take time to generate 
and must be submitted before the term-work deadline. 
MODULE 2 — Introduction to Java Programming 
Module 2: Introduction to Java Programming 
1. Learning Objectives 
• Differentiate between Procedural and Object-Oriented Programming. 
• Explain the history, features, and architecture of Java. 
• Understand the roles of JVM, JRE, and JDK. 
• Write, compile, and run a basic Java program. 
• Apply Java naming conventions and understand data types and literals. 
2. Introduction 
Programming is the process of translating a real-world problem into a formal sequence of instructions 
(an algorithm) that a computer can execute. As Donald Knuth famously observed, a person does not 
truly understand a concept until they can teach it to a computer. This discipline demands clarity of 
thought and precision of expression. 
Two dominant paradigms shape modern programming: Procedure-Oriented Programming (POP) and 
Object-Oriented Programming (OOP). Java is one of the most widely used OOP languages, designed 
to run across platforms without modification. 
3. Core Concepts 
3.1 Procedural vs. Object-Oriented Programming 
In procedural programming, a program is divided into functions or procedures. Data flows between 
these functions, and there is no strict encapsulation. This approach is suitable for smaller programs 
but becomes difficult to manage as complexity grows. 
Object-Oriented Programming structures a program around objects — self-contained units that bundle 
data (attributes) and behaviour (methods) together. An object is an instance of a class, and a class 
acts as a blueprint. For example, 'Apple' is an object that is-a 'Fruit' (the class). 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  Features of OOP — frequently tested; expect definition or 
comparison questions. 
3.2 Features of OOP 
Feature 
Description 
Encapsulation 
Bundling data and methods within a class; controls access via access 
modifiers. 
Data Abstraction 
Exposing only essential information while hiding implementation details. 
Inheritance Deriving new classes from existing ones to enable code reuse. 
Polymorphism Ability of a method or object to take multiple forms (compile-time & runtime). 
Extensibility Existing code can be extended without modification. 
Persistence Objects can survive beyond program execution (via serialization/databases). 
Message Passing Objects communicate by sending and receiving messages (method calls). 
 
3.3 Applications of OOP 
OOP principles are applied across virtually every domain in modern software engineering. Key 
application areas include image processing and pattern recognition, intelligent systems and AI, 
database management systems, web and distributed applications, enterprise resource planning 
(ERP), mobile computing, and data warehousing and mining. 
 
3.4 What is Java? 
Java is a general-purpose, class-based, object-oriented programming language originally developed 
by Sun Microsystems (later acquired by Oracle Corporation). Its defining principle is Write Once, Run 
Anywhere (WORA) — a Java program compiled on one platform can run on any other platform that 
has a Java Virtual Machine (JVM) installed. 
 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  Java characteristics — commonly asked as a 5-mark 
definition/explanation question. 
 
Java Characteristic Meaning 
General Purpose Can be used for any application domain — desktop, web, mobile, 
embedded. 
Class-Based / OOP All code is organized inside classes; supports full OOP features. 
Platform Independent Bytecode runs on any JVM regardless of OS or hardware. 
Architecturally Neutral No architecture-specific features; bytecode is hardware-independent. 
Robust Strong type checking, exception handling, and no explicit pointer 
manipulation. 
Secure Bytecode verification, class loader, and security manager protect against 
malicious code. 
Multithreaded Built-in support for concurrent execution of multiple threads. 
Dynamic Can load classes at runtime; supports reflection and late binding. 
Distributed Built-in networking APIs (RMI, sockets) for distributed computing. 
Interpreted Bytecode is interpreted by the JVM at runtime. 
High Performance JIT (Just-In-Time) compiler converts frequently executed bytecode to 
native code. 
 
3.5 History of Java — Key Milestones 
Version Year Key Features 
1996 
Initial release; AWT, Applets, basic Java APIs. 
Java 1.0 
2004 
Java 5.0 (J2SE 
1.5) 
Generics, Annotations, Enums, Autoboxing, varargs, enhanced for-loop. 
Java 8 (LTS) 
2014 
Lambda expressions, Streams API, Date & Time API, Optional, default 
methods. 
Java 9 
2017 
Module system (Project Jigsaw), JShell (REPL). 
Java 11 (LTS) 
2018 
HTTP Client API, removed Java EE modules. 
Java 17 (LTS) 
2021 
Sealed classes (standard), strong encapsulation of JDK internals. 
Java 21 (LTS) 
2023 
Virtual threads (final), pattern matching, sequenced collections. 
Sept 2025 
Java 25 (LTS, 
expected) 
Stable string templates, structured concurrency, improved memory model. 
3.6 Java Components: JVM, JRE, and JDK 
Understanding the three-layer Java platform architecture is essential for any Java developer. 
The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) is the core engine that executes Java bytecode. It is platform-specific 
— different JVM implementations exist for Windows, Linux, and macOS — but bytecode is universal. 
The JVM performs bytecode verification, class loading, memory management (garbage collection), 
and execution. 
The Java Runtime Environment (JRE) packages the JVM together with the standard Java class 
libraries (java.lang, java.util, etc.) and other support files needed to run Java programs. End users who 
only need to run Java applications install the JRE. 
The Java Development Kit (JDK) is the full development package. It contains the JRE plus the compiler 
(javac), debugger (jdb), documentation generator (javadoc), and other development tools. Developers 
must install the JDK. 
Diagram: Java Architecture 
JDK (javac, javadoc, tools) → compiles source (.java) → Bytecode (.class) → JRE → JVM 
executes bytecode → Platform-specific machine code. The JDK is the superset; JRE is a subset; 
JVM is inside the JRE. 
3.7 Java Program Lifecycle 
The lifecycle of a Java program follows these steps: (1) The programmer writes source code in a .java 
file. (2) The javac compiler translates it into platform-neutral bytecode, stored in a .class file. (3) At 
runtime, the JVM's Class Loader loads the required .class files. (4) The Bytecode Verifier checks the 
bytecode for security and correctness. (5) The Interpreter/JIT compiler executes the bytecode, 
converting it to native machine instructions. 
3.8 Data Types in Java 
Category 
Type 
Size 
Range 
Integer 
byte 
1 byte -128 to 127 
Integer 
short 
2 bytes -32,768 to 32,767 
int 
4 bytes -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647 
Integer 
Integer 
long 
8 bytes -9.2×10^18 to 9.2×10^18 
Floating Point 
float 
4 bytes 
~7 decimal digits precision 
Floating Point 
double 
8 bytes 
~15 decimal digits precision 
Character 
char 
2 bytes 
Unicode character (0–65,535) 
Boolean 
boolean 
1 bit 
true or false 
3.9 Naming Conventions 
Java follows strict naming conventions that improve code readability and professionalism. Package 
names use all-lowercase letters (e.g., java.util). Class names begin with an uppercase letter using 
CamelCase (e.g., StudentRecord). Variables and method names begin with a lowercase letter using 
camelCase (e.g., studentName, getAge()). Constants are written in ALL_UPPERCASE with 
underscores (e.g., MAX_SIZE). Exception class names end in 'Exception' for checked exceptions or 
'Error' for fatal system errors. 
4. Key Definitions 
JVM 
Java Virtual Machine — an abstract computing machine that enables Java bytecode to run on 
any platform. 
JRE 
Java Runtime Environment — includes the JVM and standard class libraries; needed to run 
Java applications. 
JDK 
Java Development Kit — includes JRE plus development tools (compiler, debugger); needed to 
develop Java programs. 
WORA 
Write Once, Run Anywhere — Java's platform independence principle; compiled bytecode 
runs on any JVM. 
Bytecode 
Intermediate representation of Java code, compiled by javac, executed by the JVM. 
5. Important Points for Quick Revision 
• Java = General Purpose + Class-Based + Object-Oriented + Platform Independent + 
Multithreaded + Robust + Secure + Distributed. 
• JDK ⊃ JRE ⊃ JVM (JDK is the largest superset). 
• Java source files have .java extension; bytecode files have .class extension. 
• Java 8 and 11 are the most widely used LTS versions; Java 17 and 21 are the latest LTS 
versions. 
• OOP Features (mnemonic): EPIM-EG-PC = Encapsulation, Polymorphism, Inheritance, 
Message Passing, Extensibility, Genericity, Persistence, Concurrency. 
• Java does not use pointers explicitly — this enhances security and robustness. 
6. Common Mistakes Students Make 
• Confusing JVM (execution engine) with JRE (runtime environment) with JDK (development 
kit). Remember: JDK includes everything. 
• Writing 'main' method signature incorrectly. Correct signature: public static void main(String[] 
args) or public static void main(String args[]). 
• Forgetting that Java is case-sensitive — 'String' (with capital S) is a class; 'string' is not a valid 
type. 
• Thinking Java is fully interpreted — modern Java uses a JIT compiler for high performance. 
7. Exam Questions 
2-Mark Questions 
Q1. What is WORA? Why is Java called platform-independent? 
Q2. Differentiate between JVM, JRE, and JDK. 
[2 Marks] 
[2 Marks] 
Q3. List any four features of OOP. 
[2 Marks] 
5-Mark Questions 
Q4. Explain the lifecycle of a Java program from source code to execution, with a neat 
diagram. 
Q5. Explain any five characteristics of Java that make it suitable for enterprise 
application development. 
[5 
Marks] 
[5 
Marks] 
10-Mark Questions 
Q6. Compare Procedural-Oriented Programming and Object-Oriented Programming. 
List all features of OOP with explanations and real-life examples. 
Q7. Write a Java program to compute simple and compound interest. Explain the 
structure of a Java program with its lifecycle. 
[10 
Marks] 
[10 
Marks] 
8. Summary 
Java is a robust, secure, platform-independent, object-oriented programming language. Its architecture 
(JDK → JRE → JVM) enables the WORA principle. OOP organizes programs around classes and 
objects and supports encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism, and abstraction. Java's evolution from 
version 1.0 (1996) to Java 25 (expected 2025) reflects continuous innovation, with Java 8, 11, 17, and 
21 being the most significant LTS releases. 
MODULE 3 — Class Fundamentals 
Module 3: Class Fundamentals 
1. Learning Objectives 
• Define a class and explain its components. 
• Understand constructors — default, parameterized, and overloaded. 
• Use the 'this' keyword, static keyword, final keyword, and instance initializer blocks. 
• Explain garbage collection and the finalize() method. 
• Describe Java inner classes and their types. 
2. Introduction 
A class is the fundamental unit of object-oriented programming in Java. It serves as the template or 
blueprint from which objects (instances) are created. Every Java program must have at least one class, 
and every statement must be inside a class. Understanding how classes, constructors, and object 
lifecycle work is critical to building well-structured Java applications. 
3. Core Concepts 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  Constructors & Constructor Overloading — one of the 
most frequently tested topics in university exams. 
3.1 Anatomy of a Class 
A class declaration in Java typically contains the following components in order: an optional access 
modifier (public or default), the class keyword, the class name (capitalized by convention), an optional 
extends clause for inheritance, optional implements clause for interfaces, and the class body enclosed 
in braces. Inside the class body, you define fields (data members), constructors, and methods. 
Example: Student Class Structure 
public class Student {   private int stdIdNo;          
private field   public Student() { }            
// private field   private String stdName;        
// 
// default constructor   public int getStdIdNo() { return 
stdIdNo; }   // getter   public void setStdIdNo(int id) { this.stdIdNo = id; }  // setter } 
3.2 Constructors 
A constructor is a special method that is automatically invoked when an object is created using the 
new keyword. Its primary purpose is to initialize the object's state (i.e., set initial values for fields). 
Constructors must have the same name as the class and have no return type, not even void. They 
cannot be declared abstract, final, static, or synchronized. 
3.2.1 Default (No-Argument) Constructor 
A constructor with no parameters is called a default constructor. If a programmer does not explicitly 
define any constructor, the Java compiler automatically provides a default constructor that initializes 
all fields to their default values (0 for numeric types, null for objects, false for boolean). Once the 
programmer defines any constructor, the compiler no longer provides the default one. 
3.2.2 Parameterized Constructor 
A parameterized constructor accepts one or more arguments, allowing the programmer to supply 
specific initial values for the object's fields at the time of creation. This is preferred when objects must 
be initialized with meaningful data rather than default values. 
3.2.3 Constructor Overloading 
Constructor overloading is the practice of defining multiple constructors within a single class, each with 
a different parameter list (differing in number, type, or order of parameters). The Java compiler selects 
the appropriate constructor based on the arguments provided during object instantiation. This allows 
flexible object creation. 
Constructor vs. Method 
Constructors: same name as class, no return type, called automatically with 'new', called only 
once per object. Methods: can have any name, must have return type (or void), called explicitly, 
can be called multiple times. 
3.3 The 'this' Keyword 
The this keyword in Java is a reference variable that points to the current object instance. It has two 
primary uses. First, it resolves naming ambiguity between instance variables and local variables or 
parameters that share the same name (this.fieldName refers to the instance variable). Second, this() 
can be used inside a constructor to call another constructor of the same class, enabling constructor 
chaining and reducing code duplication. 
3.4 The 'static' Keyword 
The static modifier can be applied to variables, methods, nested classes, and initializer blocks. A static 
variable (class variable) is shared by all instances of a class — there is only one copy of it in memory, 
regardless of how many objects are created. A static method can only access other static members 
directly and cannot use the this or super keywords. Static blocks (also called static initializers) are 
executed exactly once when the class is first loaded by the JVM, before any constructors run. 
3.5 Instance Initializer Block 
An instance initializer block is a block of code inside a class but outside any method, written inside 
curly braces. It is executed every time a new object is created, just before the constructor runs. It is 
useful for code that is common to all constructors. The order of execution is: static blocks (once) → 
instance initializer blocks → constructors. 
Block Type 
When Executed 
How Many Times 
Can Access Instance 
Members? 
When class is loaded 
Once per class 
No 
Static Block 
Instance Initializer 
Block 
When object is created, 
before constructor 
Yes 
Constructor 
When object is created 
Every object 
creation 
Every object 
creation 
Yes 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  Order of execution: static block → instance block → 
constructor — classic exam question. 
3.6 The 'final' Keyword 
The final keyword serves three distinct purposes. When applied to a variable, it makes that variable a 
constant — its value cannot be changed once assigned. When applied to a method, it prevents 
subclasses from overriding that method. When applied to a class, it prevents the class from being 
subclassed (inherited). A final variable must be initialized either at declaration, in an instance initializer 
block, or in every constructor. 
3.7 Garbage Collection 
Java manages memory automatically through a process called garbage collection. The JVM 
periodically identifies objects in the heap that are no longer referenced by any live part of the program 
and reclaims their memory. Unlike C (which uses free()) or C++ (which uses delete()), the Java 
programmer does not need to manually deallocate memory. The programmer can suggest garbage 
collection by calling System.gc(), but this does not guarantee immediate collection. An object becomes 
eligible for garbage collection when: its reference is set to null, its reference is reassigned to another 
object, or it is created anonymously without any reference. 
3.8 Java Inner Classes 
An inner class (or nested class) is a class defined within another class or interface. Java supports four 
types of inner classes, each with distinct characteristics and use cases. 
Type 
Where Defined 
Key Characteristics 
Member Inner Class 
Inside outer class, 
outside methods 
Can access all (including private) outer class 
members. Needs outer class instance. 
Anonymous Inner 
Class 
At the point of object 
creation 
Local Inner Class 
Inside a method 
No name; defined and instantiated simultaneously. 
Used for quick one-time implementations. 
Scoped to the method; can access effectively final 
local variables. 
Static Nested Class 
Inside outer class with 
static modifier 
4. Key Definitions 
Cannot access non-static outer class members. Does 
not need outer class instance. 
Constructor 
A special method with the same name as the class, no return type, invoked 
automatically on object creation to initialize state. 
Overloading 
Defining multiple methods or constructors with the same name but different parameter 
signatures within the same class. 
this 
keyword 
A reference variable in Java that refers to the current object; used to resolve naming 
conflicts and for constructor chaining. 
static 
A non-access modifier that associates a member with the class itself rather than with any 
instance. Static members exist even without object creation. 
Garbage 
Collection 
Automatic process in JVM that reclaims memory occupied by objects no longer 
reachable by the program. 
Inner 
Class 
A class declared inside another class; can access the outer class members and helps 
logically group related code. 
5. Important Points for Quick Revision 
• A constructor has no return type (not even void) and its name is the same as the class. 
• If no constructor is defined, the compiler provides a default no-arg constructor. 
• Once any constructor is defined, the compiler does NOT provide a default constructor. 
• this() call must be the first statement in a constructor. 
• Static members are shared across all objects; instance members are per-object. 
• Static blocks run once on class load; instance blocks run on each object creation. 
• final variable: must be initialized before use; final method: cannot be overridden; final class: 
cannot be subclassed. 
• Garbage collection is automatic; System.gc() is a request, not a command. 
6. Common Mistakes Students Make 
• Giving a return type to a constructor — this turns it into a regular method, not a constructor. 
• Forgetting to call super() or this() as the first statement in a constructor chain. 
• Trying to access instance variables inside a static method — static methods cannot access 
non-static members directly. 
• Assuming System.gc() immediately frees memory — garbage collection is non-deterministic. 
7. Exam Questions 
2-Mark Questions 
Q1. What is a constructor? How is it different from a regular method? 
Q2. Explain the use of the 'this' keyword with an example. 
[2 Marks] 
[2 Marks] 
Q3. What is garbage collection? How can an object become eligible for GC? 
[2 Marks] 
5-Mark Questions 
Q4. Explain constructor overloading with a Java program demonstrating at least three 
overloaded constructors. 
Q5. What are inner classes? Explain any two types of inner classes with examples. 
[5 
Marks] 
[5 Marks] 
10-Mark Questions 
Q6. Explain static variables, static methods, and static blocks with examples. Describe 
the order of execution of static and instance initializer blocks and constructors. 
Q7. Write a Java program with a Student class containing overloaded constructors, 
getter/setter methods, and a static counter to track the total number of objects created. 
Explain each concept used. 
[10 
Marks] 
[10 
Marks] 
8. Summary 
Classes are the building blocks of Java programs. Constructors initialize objects and support 
overloading for flexible creation. The this keyword references the current object. The static keyword 
creates class-level members shared across instances. Static blocks run once on class loading, 
instance blocks run before each constructor, and constructors complete the initialization. The final 
keyword creates constants and prevents overriding or inheritance. Garbage collection automates 
memory management. Inner classes allow logically nested code structures with access to enclosing 
class members. 
MODULE 4 — String Handling 
Module 4: String Handling 
1. Learning Objectives 
• Understand the String class and its immutability. 
• Use important String class methods for text processing. 
• Differentiate between String, StringBuffer, and StringBuilder. 
• Apply string manipulation techniques: concatenation, splitting, joining, and regex. 
• Perform string tokenization. 
2. Introduction 
Strings are among the most frequently used data types in any programming language. In Java, a String 
is an object that represents an immutable sequence of characters. The class is defined in the java.lang 
package, meaning it is available automatically without any import statement. Understanding string 
handling is critical for text processing, data validation, parsing, and almost every real-world Java 
application. 
3. Core Concepts 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  String vs. StringBuffer vs. StringBuilder — a classic 
comparison question in 5 or 10-mark exams. 
3.1 String Immutability 
The most important characteristic of the String class is its immutability. Once a String object is created, 
its content cannot be modified. Any operation that appears to modify a string (such as concatenation 
or replace) actually creates a new String object in memory. This has performance implications when 
many string modifications are needed — repeated concatenation in a loop can generate a large 
number of intermediate String objects. 
3.2 String Methods 
Method 
Description 
length() 
Returns the number of 
characters. 
Example 
"Hello".length() → 5 
charAt(i) 
Returns the character at index i. 
"Hello".charAt(1) → 'e' 
substring(s, e) 
Returns substring from index s 
to e-1. 
"Hello".substring(1, 4) → "ell" 
equals(s) 
Compares content (case
sensitive). 
"abc".equals("abc") → true 
equalsIgnoreCase(s) 
Content comparison, ignoring 
case. 
"ABC".equalsIgnoreCase("abc") → true 
compareTo(s) 
Lexicographic comparison; 
returns 0 if equal. 
"abc".compareTo("abd") → -1 
indexOf(c) 
Returns first index of 
character/string. 
"Hello".indexOf('l') → 2 
toLowerCase() 
Converts to lowercase. 
"HELLO".toLowerCase() → "hello" 
toUpperCase() 
Converts to uppercase. 
trim() 
"hello".toUpperCase() → "HELLO" 
Removes leading and trailing 
whitespace. 
"  hi  ".trim() → "hi" 
replace(old, new) 
Replaces all occurrences. 
"abcabc".replace('a','x') → "xbcxbc" 
3.3 StringBuffer Class 
StringBuffer is the mutable alternative to String. It is defined in the java.lang package and represents 
a mutable sequence of characters. Unlike String, modifications to a StringBuffer object do not create 
new objects — they modify the existing object in place. StringBuffer is synchronized, making it thread
safe and suitable for use in multi-threaded environments. However, synchronization adds overhead, 
making it slower than StringBuilder in single-threaded contexts. 
Key StringBuffer methods include append() for adding content, insert() for inserting at a specific 
position, replace() for replacing a range of characters, delete() for removing characters, reverse() for 
reversing the sequence, capacity() for querying the internal buffer size, and ensureCapacity() for pre
allocating space. 
3.4 StringBuilder Class 
StringBuilder is similar to StringBuffer in that it is mutable and supports all the same methods. The 
critical difference is that StringBuilder is not synchronized and therefore not thread-safe. In a single
threaded application, StringBuilder should always be preferred over StringBuffer because it is faster 
due to the absence of synchronization overhead. 
Feature 
String 
StringBuffer 
Mutability 
StringBuilder 
Immutable 
Mutable 
Thread Safety 
Mutable 
Thread-safe 
(immutable) 
Thread-safe 
(synchronized) 
Not thread-safe 
Performance 
Slowest (new 
object each 
change) 
Moderate 
Fastest (no sync overhead) 
Use Case 
Fixed, constant 
text 
Multi-threaded mutable 
string operations 
3.5 String Manipulation Techniques 
Single-threaded mutable string 
operations 
Java provides several built-in techniques for common string operations. Concatenation can be done 
using the + operator or the concat() method. Formatted strings can be produced using String.format(), 
which works like printf in C. A string can be split into an array of tokens using the split(regex) method, 
which accepts a regular expression as the delimiter. Multiple strings can be joined with a delimiter 
using String.join(delimiter, elements). Characters or substrings can be replaced using replace() (for 
exact matches) or replaceAll() (for regex patterns). 
3.6 Regular Expressions (Regex) 
Regular expressions are patterns used to match character sequences within strings. Java provides the 
java.util.regex package with Pattern and Matcher classes for advanced regex processing. Commonly 
used regex symbols include: . (matches any character), * (zero or more), + (one or more), ? (zero or 
one), \d (any digit), \w (word character: alphanumeric + underscore), and \s (whitespace). For simple 
validation, the String.matches(regex) method can be used directly without Pattern/Matcher. 
3.7 String Tokenization 
String tokenization is the process of splitting a string into smaller units called tokens based on a 
delimiter. The most modern approach is to use the split(regex) method on a String, which returns an 
array of tokens. A legacy approach uses the StringTokenizer class from java.util, which is simpler but 
less flexible. For most new code, split() is recommended. 
4. Key Definitions 
Immutability 
A property of String objects in Java whereby their value cannot be changed after 
creation; any 'modification' produces a new object. 
StringBuffer 
A mutable, thread-safe sequence of characters in Java; modifications do not create 
new objects. 
StringBuilder 
A mutable, non-thread-safe sequence of characters; preferred over StringBuffer in 
single-threaded code due to better performance. 
Regex 
Regular Expression — a sequence of characters that forms a search pattern, used for string 
matching and validation. 
Tokenization 
Splitting a string into meaningful substrings (tokens) based on a delimiter pattern. 
5. Important Points for Quick Revision 
• String objects are stored in the String Constant Pool; == compares references, .equals() 
compares content. 
• String: immutable. StringBuffer: mutable + thread-safe. StringBuilder: mutable + NOT thread
safe. 
• For performance in loops with string manipulation, always use StringBuilder. 
• split() returns String[]. String.join() creates a single String from an array/list. 
• String.format() uses format specifiers like %s (string), %d (integer), %f (float). 
6. Exam Questions 
2-Mark Questions 
Q1. Why is String immutable in Java? What happens when you concatenate two 
strings? 
Q2. Differentiate between StringBuffer and StringBuilder. 
[2 
Marks] 
[2 Marks] 
5-Mark Questions 
Q3. Write a Java program that demonstrates at least five String class methods with 
appropriate output. 
Q4. Explain regular expressions in Java. Write a program to validate a mobile number 
using regex. 
[5 
Marks] 
[5 
Marks] 
10-Mark Questions 
Q5. Compare String, StringBuffer, and StringBuilder with code examples 
demonstrating their behaviour. Discuss use cases and performance considerations. 
7. Summary 
[10 
Marks] 
Strings in Java are immutable objects defined in java.lang. The String class provides rich methods for 
text operations. StringBuffer offers mutability with thread-safety, while StringBuilder offers mutability 
with better single-threaded performance. String manipulation techniques include concatenation, 
formatting, splitting, joining, and regex-based operations. Tokenization breaks strings into meaningful 
tokens, useful in parsers and text processors. 
MODULE 5 — Inheritance, Interfaces & Packages 
Module 5: Inheritance, Interfaces & Packages 
1. Learning Objectives 
• Explain inheritance and its forms; use extends and super. 
• Understand method overriding, dynamic dispatch, and runtime polymorphism. 
• Describe abstract classes and their role in abstraction. 
• Define and implement interfaces; understand multiple inheritance via interfaces. 
• Create, organize, and import Java packages. 
2. Introduction 
Inheritance is one of the four pillars of OOP. It establishes an 'is-a' relationship between a parent class 
(superclass) and a child class (subclass), enabling the subclass to inherit and extend the superclass's 
data and behaviour. Interfaces take abstraction further by defining contracts that multiple unrelated 
classes can implement, supporting multiple inheritance safely. Packages organize classes into logical 
namespaces, preventing naming conflicts and enabling modular design. 
3. Core Concepts 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  Inheritance types, method overriding, abstract class vs. 
interface — high-frequency exam topics. 
3.1 Forms of Inheritance 
Type 
Description 
Single 
One subclass inherits from one superclass. 
Yes 
Java Support 
Multilevel 
A subclass is itself a superclass for another 
class (A→B→C). 
Yes 
Hierarchical 
Multiple subclasses inherit from one 
superclass. 
Yes 
Multiple 
One class inherits from multiple 
superclasses. 
Hybrid 
Combination of two or more types. 
No (causes diamond problem) — 
only via interfaces 
Yes (via interfaces for the multiple 
part) 
Multipath 
A class inherits from multiple paths that lead 
to the same base. 
No directly — via interfaces 
3.2 Using extends and Member Access 
A subclass is declared using the extends keyword. The subclass inherits all non-private members 
(fields and methods) of the superclass. Private members are not accessible directly in the subclass — 
they must be accessed indirectly through getter and setter methods. Constructors and static/instance 
initializer blocks are not inherited. 
3.3 The super Keyword 
The super keyword provides a reference to the immediate parent class. It has two primary uses. First, 
super() calls a specific constructor of the superclass, enabling the subclass to initialize the inherited 
state. This call must be the first statement in the subclass constructor. Second, super.methodName() 
explicitly calls the overridden version of a method in the superclass, useful when the subclass wants 
to extend (rather than replace) the parent's behaviour. 
3.4 Method Overriding & Dynamic Dispatch 
Method overriding occurs when a subclass defines an instance method with the same name, return 
type, and parameter list as a method in the superclass. At runtime, if a superclass reference variable 
holds a subclass object, the JVM calls the overridden method in the subclass. This mechanism, known 
as dynamic method dispatch (or runtime polymorphism), is a cornerstone of flexible, extensible OOP 
design. 
Example 
Light light = new TubeLight();  // Superclass reference, subclass object light.switchOn();  // Calls 
TubeLight's switchOn() at runtime → Runtime Polymorphism 
3.5 Covariant Return Types 
Java allows a method in a subclass to override a method in its superclass and return a type that is a 
subclass of the original return type. This is called a covariant return type. For example, if a superclass 
method returns Shape, the overriding method in the subclass may return Circle (a subclass of Shape). 
This makes overriding more type-specific and eliminates the need for casting in the caller. 
3.6 Abstract Classes 
An abstract class is a class declared with the abstract keyword. It may contain abstract methods 
(methods declared without an implementation body) and concrete methods (with full implementations). 
An abstract class cannot be instantiated — it serves as a partially implemented template for 
subclasses. Any subclass of an abstract class must either implement all abstract methods or declare 
itself abstract as well. 
Use abstract classes when: you want to share code among several closely related classes, you need 
to declare protected or package-private methods, or you want to declare non-static/non-final fields. 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  Abstract class vs. Interface — one of the most popular 
comparison questions in university exams. 
3.7 Interfaces 
An interface is a completely abstract type that defines a contract — a set of method signatures that 
implementing classes must provide. By default, all methods in an interface are public and abstract, 
and all fields are public, static, and final (constants). A class implements an interface using the 
implements keyword and must provide bodies for all abstract methods. 
Java 8 introduced default and static methods in interfaces. A default method has an implementation 
inside the interface and is inherited by implementing classes (used to add new methods without 
breaking existing implementations). A static method in an interface belongs to the interface itself, not 
to instances of implementing classes. 
Feature 
Abstract Class 
Keyword 
Interface 
abstract class 
interface 
Instantiation 
Cannot be instantiated 
Cannot be instantiated 
Methods 
Can have abstract and concrete 
methods 
Abstract (default); default & static 
since Java 8 
Fields 
Can have instance variables 
Constructors 
Can have constructors 
Only public static final constants 
Multiple Inheritance 
Cannot have constructors 
Not supported (single extends) 
Access Modifiers 
Any modifier 
Supported (class can implement 
multiple interfaces) 
Methods: public (implicit). Fields: 
public static final 
Inheritance Keyword 
extends 
3.8 Packages 
implements 
A package in Java is a namespace container that groups related classes and interfaces. Packages 
serve several important purposes: they prevent name collisions between classes in different libraries, 
enable controlled access (package-private access), promote code reuse, and facilitate easier software 
distribution. By convention, package names are written in all lowercase, often following the reverse 
domain naming convention (e.g., com.company.product). 
A package is declared using the package keyword, which must be the first statement in a source file. 
Classes in other packages are accessed using the import statement, either by importing a specific 
class (import java.util.Scanner) or all classes in a package (import java.util.*). Static imports (import 
static) allow direct use of static members without qualifying with the class name. 
4. Key Definitions 
Inheritance 
An OOP mechanism where a subclass derives properties and behaviour from a 
superclass, promoting code reuse. 
Method 
Overriding 
Redefining a method in a subclass with the same signature as in the superclass, 
enabling runtime polymorphism. 
Dynamic 
Dispatch 
The JVM mechanism that determines which overridden method to call at runtime 
based on the actual object type, not the reference type. 
Abstract 
Class 
A class declared with 'abstract' that may have abstract methods; cannot be 
instantiated; serves as a template for subclasses. 
Interface 
A contract defining abstract methods that implementing classes must provide; supports 
multiple inheritance in Java. 
Package 
A namespace grouping related classes and interfaces; prevents name conflicts and 
controls access. 
5. Important Points for Quick Revision 
• Java supports single, multilevel, and hierarchical inheritance directly; multiple inheritance is 
supported only through interfaces. 
• A class can extend only one class but can implement multiple interfaces. 
• super() must be the first statement in a subclass constructor. 
• Method overriding requires the same method name, same return type (or covariant), same 
parameter list. 
• Abstract class: can have state (instance variables) and partial implementation. Interface: only 
constants and abstract/default/static methods. 
• All interface fields are implicitly public static final; all interface methods are implicitly public 
abstract (except default/static). 
6. Exam Questions 
2-Mark Questions 
Q1. What is dynamic method dispatch? How is it related to runtime polymorphism? 
Q2. What is the role of the 'super' keyword in inheritance? 
[2 Marks] 
[2 Marks] 
Q3. Why does Java not support multiple inheritance through classes? How is it 
achieved? 
[2 
Marks] 
5-Mark Questions 
Q4. Compare abstract class and interface in Java. When would you prefer one over 
the other? 
Q5. Explain method overriding with a complete Java example. What are the rules for 
overriding? 
[5 
Marks] 
[5 
Marks] 
10-Mark Questions 
Q6. Write a Java program to demonstrate multilevel inheritance, method overriding, 
and dynamic method dispatch. Explain the output and how the JVM resolves method 
calls at runtime. 
[10 
Marks] 
Q7. Explain packages in Java. Write a program with two packages where one 
package's class is used in another package, demonstrating access modifiers and 
import statements. 
[10 
Marks] 
7. Summary 
Inheritance enables code reuse through the 'is-a' relationship. Java supports single, multilevel, and 
hierarchical inheritance. The super keyword accesses the parent class constructor and members. 
Method overriding drives runtime polymorphism via dynamic dispatch. Abstract classes provide partial 
implementations, while interfaces define pure contracts and enable multiple inheritance. Packages 
organize code into namespaces, controlling access and preventing conflicts. 
MODULE 6 — Functional Interfaces & Lambda Expressions 
Module 6: Functional Interfaces & Lambda Expressions 
1. Learning Objectives 
• Understand functional programming concepts introduced in Java 8. 
• Define and use functional interfaces. 
• Write and apply lambda expressions in various contexts. 
• Use built-in functional interfaces from java.util.function. 
• Understand sealed interfaces and their use in pattern matching. 
2. Introduction 
Java 8 introduced functional programming capabilities to the Java language, most notably through 
lambda expressions and functional interfaces. These features allow programmers to treat behaviour 
(functions) as data — passing methods as arguments, returning them from other methods, and storing 
them in variables. This leads to more concise, readable, and flexible code, especially when working 
with collections, streams, and event-driven programming. 
3. Core Concepts 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  Lambda expressions and functional interfaces — 
introduced in Java 8 and commonly tested in modern Java exams. 
3.1 Functional Interface 
A functional interface is an interface that contains exactly one abstract method. It may have any 
number of default or static methods. The @FunctionalInterface annotation is used to declare a 
functional interface; the compiler will report an error if more than one abstract method is present. 
Functional interfaces serve as the target type for lambda expressions — a lambda expression is 
essentially a concise implementation of the single abstract method. 
3.2 Common Built-in Functional Interfaces (java.util.function) 
Interface 
Method 
Purpose 
Predicate<T> 
boolean test(T t) 
Example Lambda 
Test a condition; returns 
true/false 
Function<T, R> 
R apply(T t) 
x -> x > 10 
Transform/map one type 
to another 
s -> s.length() 
Consumer<T> 
void accept(T t) 
Perform an action; no 
return value 
s -> System.out.println(s) 
Supplier<T> 
T get() 
Supply a value; takes no 
arguments 
() -> new Student() 
BiFunction<T,U,R> 
R apply(T t, U u) 
Function with two inputs 
UnaryOperator<T> 
(a, b) -> a + b 
T apply(T t) 
Function where input and 
output same type 
3.3 Lambda Expressions 
s -> s.toUpperCase() 
A lambda expression provides a concise way to represent an anonymous function — a block of code 
with parameters that can be passed to methods or stored in variables. The syntax consists of a 
parameter list, the arrow operator (->), and a body. If the body is a single expression, braces and the 
return keyword can be omitted. If it contains multiple statements, braces are required. 
Lambda Syntax Variations 
(parameters) -> expression                         
return value; }       
* x                                         
// single expression (parameters) -> { statements; 
// block body () -> System.out.println("Hello")                  
// no parameters x -> x 
// one parameter, inferred type 
3.4 Real-World Use Cases of Lambdas 
Lambda expressions are most commonly used with the Java Streams API and Collections API. For 
example, sorting a list of names alphabetically can be written as: list.sort((a, b) -> a.compareTo(b)). 
Filtering a list of numbers greater than 10: list.stream().filter(x -> x > 10). Mapping strings to their 
lengths: list.stream().map(s -> s.length()). These patterns replace verbose anonymous inner class 
implementations with single-line expressions. 
3.5 Sealed Interfaces (Java 17+) 
A sealed interface (introduced in Java 15 as preview, standardized in Java 17) restricts which classes 
may implement it. The permitted implementors are listed explicitly using the permits clause. Each 
permitted class must be declared as final, sealed, or non-sealed. Sealed interfaces improve API design 
by providing precise control over the class hierarchy, and they enable exhaustive pattern matching in 
switch expressions — the compiler can verify that all permitted types are handled. 
4. Key Definitions 
Functional 
Interface 
An interface with exactly one abstract method; serves as the target type for lambda 
expressions; optionally annotated with @FunctionalInterface. 
Lambda 
Expression 
An anonymous function represented as (parameters) -> body; provides a concise 
implementation of a functional interface's abstract method. 
Predicate<T> 
A functional interface with test(T t) method that evaluates a boolean condition on an 
input. 
Sealed 
Interface 
An interface that explicitly restricts the set of classes that may implement it using the 
permits clause. 
5. Important Points for Quick Revision 
• Functional interface = exactly ONE abstract method. Can have multiple default/static 
methods. 
• @FunctionalInterface annotation is optional but recommended for documentation and 
compiler checking. 
• Predicate tests conditions, Function transforms data, Consumer performs actions, Supplier 
produces values. 
• Lambda syntax: () -> {} for no args and block body; x -> x*x for single arg single expression. 
• Sealed interfaces (Java 17) use 'permits' to restrict implementors; permitted classes must be 
final/sealed/non-sealed. 
6. Exam Questions 
2-Mark Questions 
Q1. What is a functional interface? Give an example from java.util.function. 
Q2. Write the syntax of a lambda expression. What replaces a lambda expression in 
pre-Java-8 code? 
[2 Marks] 
[2 
Marks] 
5-Mark Questions 
Q3. Write a Java program using lambda expressions with Predicate, Function, and 
Consumer interfaces. Show at least one use case for each. 
10-Mark Questions 
Q4. Explain functional interfaces and lambda expressions in Java 8. Write a program 
that sorts a list of Employee objects by salary using a lambda, filters employees with 
salary > 50000, and prints their names using a Consumer. Explain each step. 
[5 
Marks] 
[10 
Marks] 
7. Summary 
Java 8 introduced functional programming through functional interfaces and lambda expressions. A 
functional interface has one abstract method and acts as the target type for a lambda. Built-in interfaces 
in java.util.function (Predicate, Function, Consumer, Supplier) cover the most common patterns. 
Lambda expressions replace verbose anonymous inner class syntax with concise one-liners. Java 17 
added sealed interfaces to control the class hierarchy and enable exhaustive pattern matching. 
  
MODULE 7 — Exception Handling 
Module 7: Exception Handling 
1. Learning Objectives 
• Understand what exceptions are and why handling them is necessary. 
• Distinguish between checked and unchecked exceptions. 
• Use try-catch-finally blocks, throw and throws keywords. 
• Apply try-with-resources for automatic resource management. 
• Create custom exceptions and understand exception propagation. 
2. Introduction 
An exception is an event that disrupts the normal flow of a program's execution. Without exception 
handling, a runtime error would cause the program to terminate abruptly with an error message. Java 
provides a robust exception handling framework that allows programs to gracefully detect, report, and 
recover from errors. This separation of error-handling code from normal logic makes programs more 
readable and maintainable. 
3. Core Concepts 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  try-catch-finally, throw vs. throws, checked vs. unchecked 
exceptions — almost always appears in 5-mark or 10-mark questions. 
3.1 Exception Hierarchy 
All exceptions and errors in Java are objects. The root of the exception hierarchy is the Throwable 
class. It has two direct subclasses: Error and Exception. Errors (e.g., OutOfMemoryError, 
StackOverflowError) represent serious system-level problems that a program typically cannot recover 
from. Exceptions are further divided into checked exceptions (subclasses of Exception, excluding 
RuntimeException) and unchecked exceptions (subclasses of RuntimeException). 
Hierarchy 
Throwable ├── Error (OutOfMemoryError, StackOverflowError — not recoverable) └── 
Exception     ├── Checked (IOException, SQLException, FileNotFoundException — must handle)     
└── RuntimeException / Unchecked (NullPointerException, ArithmeticException, 
ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException — optional to handle) 
3.2 Checked vs. Unchecked Exceptions 
Property 
Checked Exception 
Detected at 
Unchecked Exception 
Compile time 
Runtime 
Must handle? 
Yes — try-catch or throws required 
No — optional 
Inherits from 
Exception (not RuntimeException) 
Examples 
RuntimeException 
IOException, SQLException, 
FileNotFoundException 
NullPointerException, 
ArithmeticException, 
ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException 
Typical cause 
External resource issues (file, DB, 
network) 
Programming logic errors 
3.3 try-catch-finally Block 
The primary mechanism for handling exceptions is the try-catch-finally construct. The try block contains 
the code that might throw an exception. One or more catch blocks follow, each catching a specific 
exception type and providing a recovery strategy. The finally block is optional and contains code that 
must execute regardless of whether an exception occurred — typically used for cleanup (closing files, 
releasing connections). 
Multiple exceptions can be caught in a single catch block using the multi-catch syntax introduced in 
Java 7: catch(IOException | SQLException e). Catch blocks are evaluated in order; more specific 
exceptions should be caught before more general ones. 
3.4 throw and throws Keywords 
The throw keyword is used inside a method body to explicitly throw an exception object. It is typically 
used to enforce business rules (e.g., throw new IllegalArgumentException("Age cannot be negative")). 
The method immediately transfers control to the nearest enclosing catch block. 
The throws keyword appears in a method's signature to declare that the method may propagate one 
or more checked exceptions to its caller. The caller must then either handle the exception with try
catch or declare it with throws in its own signature. 
throw vs. throws 
throw: used inside a method body to explicitly throw an exception (throw new Exception()). throws: 
used in method signature to declare that the method may throw that exception (public void read() 
throws IOException). 
3.5 Try-With-Resources (Java 7) 
The try-with-resources statement automatically closes resources (any object implementing 
AutoCloseable) when the try block exits, whether normally or due to an exception. This eliminates the 
boilerplate of a finally block just for closing resources and guarantees closure even in exception 
scenarios. Multiple resources can be declared, separated by semicolons; they are closed in reverse 
order of declaration. 
3.6 final, finally, and finalize — Differences 
Keyword 
Type 
Purpose 
final 
Used With 
Keyword 
Prevent reassignment (variable), overriding 
(method), subclassing (class) 
Variables, methods, 
classes 
finally 
Block 
Executes after try-catch regardless of 
outcome; used for cleanup 
try-catch statement 
finalize() 
Method 
Called by GC before object is destroyed; used 
for cleanup (deprecated) 
3.7 Custom Exceptions 
Objects 
Java allows programmers to define their own exception classes to represent application-specific error 
conditions. A custom checked exception extends Exception; a custom unchecked exception extends 
RuntimeException. Custom exceptions improve code clarity by giving domain-specific names to error 
conditions. They typically contain constructors that accept a message string passed to the parent class 
via super(message). 
3.8 Exception Propagation 
When a method throws an exception that it does not catch, the exception propagates up the call stack 
to the calling method. If the calling method also does not catch it, it propagates further up. This 
continues until either the exception is caught by some method in the stack, or it reaches the main() 
method, at which point the JVM prints the stack trace and terminates the program. 
3.9 Exception Handling in Method Overriding 
There are specific rules governing exceptions in overriding. If the superclass method does not declare 
any checked exception, the overriding subclass method cannot declare a checked exception (but may 
declare unchecked exceptions). If the superclass method declares a checked exception, the overriding 
method may declare the same exception, a subclass of that exception, or no exception at all. It may 
not declare a broader (parent) checked exception. 
4. Key Definitions 
Exception 
An event that disrupts normal program flow; represented as an object of a class derived 
from Throwable. 
Checked 
Exception 
An exception checked at compile time that must be declared or handled; inherits 
from Exception (not RuntimeException). 
Unchecked 
Exception 
A runtime exception not checked at compile time; inherits from 
RuntimeException; optional to handle. 
throw 
A keyword used inside a method to explicitly throw an exception object. 
throws 
A keyword in a method signature that declares the checked exceptions a method may 
propagate to its caller. 
Exception 
Propagation 
The mechanism by which an uncaught exception travels up the call stack until it 
is caught or causes program termination. 
5. Important Points for Quick Revision 
• Checked exceptions must be handled (try-catch) or declared (throws). Unchecked exceptions 
do not require either. 
• finally block ALWAYS executes, even if a return statement is inside try/catch. 
• throw (keyword) throws an exception object; throws (clause) declares that a method may 
throw. 
• try-with-resources (Java 7): automatically closes AutoCloseable resources; preferred over 
finally for resource management. 
• Custom exception for checked: extends Exception. For unchecked: extends 
RuntimeException. 
• Overriding rule: subclass cannot throw broader checked exceptions than the superclass 
method. 
6. Exam Questions 
2-Mark Questions 
Q1. Differentiate between checked and unchecked exceptions with two examples 
each. 
Q2. What is the purpose of the 'finally' block? Will it execute if a return statement is in 
the try block? 
[2 
Marks] 
[2 
Marks] 
Q3. What is the difference between 'throw' and 'throws' keywords? 
[2 Marks] 
5-Mark Questions 
Q4. Write a Java program that demonstrates try-catch-finally with multiple catch blocks. 
Include an example of try-with-resources. 
Q5. Write a Java program defining a custom exception 'InvalidAgeException'. Throw it 
in a method that validates age and catch it in main(). 
[5 
Marks] 
[5 
Marks] 
10-Mark Questions 
Q6. Explain the exception handling mechanism in Java. Explain the exception 
hierarchy, checked vs. unchecked exceptions, exception propagation, and the rules for 
exception handling in method overriding, with code examples. 
7. Summary 
[10 
Marks] 
Exception handling in Java separates error detection from normal logic. The Throwable hierarchy 
divides exceptions into Errors (system-level, non-recoverable) and Exceptions (checked and 
unchecked). The try-catch-finally construct provides structured recovery. The throw keyword explicitly 
raises exceptions; throws declares propagated checked exceptions. Try-with-resources automates 
cleanup. Custom exceptions improve domain-specific error communication. Exception propagation 
travels up the call stack until caught. 
MODULE 8 — Multithreaded Programming 
Module 8: Multithreaded Programming 
1. Learning Objectives 
• Understand multitasking: process-based vs. thread-based. 
• Explain the thread lifecycle and its states. 
• Create threads by extending Thread class and implementing Runnable. 
• Use thread methods: start, sleep, join, getName, setPriority. 
• Understand thread priority and scheduling. 
2. Introduction 
Multithreading is the ability of a CPU to execute multiple threads of execution concurrently within a 
single process. In Java, multithreading allows a program to perform multiple tasks simultaneously — 
for example, downloading a file while updating a progress bar. The Java platform provides built-in 
language-level support for multithreading through the Thread class and Runnable interface, making 
concurrent programming more accessible than in many other languages. 
3. Core Concepts 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  Thread lifecycle diagram and its 5 states — almost always 
asked in exams as a diagram + explanation question. 
3.1 Multitasking: Process-Based vs. Thread-Based 
Property 
Process-Based 
Unit of execution 
Process (heavyweight) 
Thread-Based 
Memory 
Thread (lightweight) 
Each process has its own address 
space 
Communication cost 
High (IPC mechanisms needed) 
Threads share the same address 
space 
Context switch cost 
Low (shared memory) 
Higher 
Lower 
Example 
Running Excel and Chrome 
simultaneously 
Multiple tabs loading in one browser 
3.2 Thread Lifecycle (5 States) 
A Java thread passes through five states during its existence, controlled by the JVM. 
State 
Description 
Entry Condition 
New Thread object created but start() not yet 
called. 
new Thread() 
Runnable Thread ready to run; waiting for CPU 
time slice. 
After start() is called 
Running Thread is actively executing (selected 
by thread scheduler). 
Scheduler picks this thread 
Blocked/Waiting Thread alive but not eligible to run; 
waiting for a resource or lock. 
sleep(), wait(), I/O operation 
Terminated Thread has finished execution; run() 
method has returned. 
run() method exits normally or exception 
thrown 
 
3.3 Creating Threads 
There are two ways to create a thread in Java. The first is to extend the Thread class and override its 
run() method. The second is to implement the Runnable interface and pass an instance to a Thread 
object's constructor. Implementing Runnable is generally preferred because: it does not use up the 
single inheritance slot (a class can extend another class and still be Runnable), and it promotes 
separation of the task (Runnable) from the thread execution mechanism. 
 
Method 1: Extending Thread 
class MyThread extends Thread {   public void run() { System.out.println("Thread running"); } } 
MyThread t = new MyThread(); t.start();   // Calls run() via JVM 
 
Method 2: Implementing Runnable 
class MyTask implements Runnable {   public void run() { System.out.println("Task running"); } } 
Thread t = new Thread(new MyTask()); t.start(); 
 
3.4 Important Thread Methods 
Method Description 
start() Starts a new thread; JVM calls run() internally. Cannot be called twice on the 
same thread. 
run() Contains the task logic; called by JVM when thread is scheduled. 
sleep(ms) Pauses execution for specified milliseconds; throws InterruptedException. 
join() Waits for a thread to die before continuing. 
getName() / setName() Gets or sets the thread's name. 
getPriority() / setPriority() Gets or sets the thread's priority (1–10). 
currentThread() Static method returning a reference to the currently executing thread. 
getId() Returns the unique ID of the thread. 
 
3.5 Thread Priority & Scheduling 
Every Java thread has a priority, an integer value between 1 (MIN_PRIORITY) and 10 
(MAX_PRIORITY), with the default being 5 (NORM_PRIORITY). The thread scheduler uses priorities 
as hints when deciding which thread to execute next, but the JVM specification does not guarantee 
strictly priority-based scheduling — the actual behavior depends on the underlying OS. 
Important Note 
Calling start() twice on the same Thread object throws IllegalThreadStateException. Always 
create a new Thread object to restart a task. 
4. Key Definitions 
Thread 
A lightweight sub-process; the smallest unit of concurrent execution within a process. 
Runnable 
A functional interface with a single run() method; represents a task to be executed by a 
thread. 
Thread 
Scheduler 
The JVM component that decides which runnable thread should execute next; 
typically based on priority and time-slicing. 
Context 
Switch 
The process of saving the state of a running thread and loading the state of another 
thread to continue its execution. 
5. Important Points for Quick Revision 
• Two ways to create threads: extend Thread OR implement Runnable. Runnable is preferred. 
• start() → creates new thread, calls run() via JVM. Calling run() directly does NOT create a 
new thread. 
• Thread states: New → Runnable → Running → Blocked → Terminated. 
• Thread priority: MIN=1, NORM=5, MAX=10. Higher priority threads get more CPU time but 
not guaranteed. 
• sleep() suspends the current thread; it releases the CPU but does not release any held locks. 
6. Exam Questions 
2-Mark Questions 
Q1. What is the difference between start() and run() in Java threads? 
Q2. List the five states of a Java thread lifecycle. 
[2 Marks] 
[2 Marks] 
5-Mark Questions 
Q3. Explain the thread lifecycle with a state diagram. Write a Java program 
demonstrating thread creation using both Thread class and Runnable interface. 
[5 
Marks] 
10-Mark Questions 
Q4. Compare process-based and thread-based multitasking. Explain thread states, 
thread priority, and the sleep() and join() methods with code examples. 
7. Summary 
[10 
Marks] 
Multithreading in Java enables concurrent execution of lightweight threads within a process, sharing 
memory and resources. Threads are created by extending Thread or implementing Runnable. The 
thread lifecycle has five states: New, Runnable, Running, Blocked/Waiting, and Terminated. The start() 
method initiates a new thread; run() is its task body. Thread priority provides scheduling hints. Key 
methods include sleep(), join(), getName(), and setPriority(). 
MODULE 9 — File NIO 
Module 9: File NIO (New Input/Output) 
1. Learning Objectives 
• Understand the Path interface and Files class for file operations. 
• Differentiate Byte Streams and Character Streams. 
• Explain serialization and deserialization. 
• Understand NIO fundamentals: Buffer, Channel, and Selector. 
• Use DirectoryStream and file walking (walkFileTree). 
2. Introduction 
Java NIO (New I/O), introduced in Java 1.4 and significantly enhanced in Java 7 with NIO.2, is a 
collection of APIs for intensive I/O operations. Unlike the traditional java.io package (which is stream
oriented and blocking), NIO is buffer-oriented and supports non-blocking I/O, making it far more 
efficient for building high-performance servers and file processing applications that need to handle 
thousands of concurrent connections. 
3. Core Concepts 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  NIO vs. IO comparison table — frequently tested. Also: 
Buffer-Channel-Selector architecture. 
3.1 Path Interface 
The Path interface, from java.nio.file, represents a filesystem path. It replaces the older File class with 
a more flexible and feature-rich API. Key methods include getFileName() (returns the final element of 
the path), getParent() (returns the parent directory path), resolve() (combines two paths), normalize() 
(removes redundant . and .. elements), and toAbsolutePath() (converts a relative path to an absolute 
one). 
3.2 Files Class 
The Files class (java.nio.file) provides static utility methods for file and directory operations. Common 
operations include checking existence and type (exists(), isDirectory(), isRegularFile()), creating files 
and directories (createFile(), createDirectory()), copying and moving (copy(), move()), reading and 
writing (readAllLines(), write()), and deleting (delete(), deleteIfExists()). 
3.3 Byte Streams and Character Streams 
Java I/O uses two parallel hierarchies for reading and writing data. Byte Streams deal with raw binary 
data (images, audio, executables) and are based on InputStream and OutputStream (e.g., 
FileInputStream, FileOutputStream). Character Streams deal with text data in Unicode and are based 
on Reader and Writer (e.g., FileReader, FileWriter, BufferedReader, PrintWriter). For text files, 
character streams are preferred because they handle character encoding correctly. 
3.4 Serialization 
Serialization is the process of converting a Java object's state into a byte stream, enabling it to be 
saved to a file, transmitted over a network, or stored in a database. Deserialization is the reverse — 
reconstructing the object from the byte stream. For a class to be serializable, it must implement the 
Serializable marker interface (from java.io). Fields marked as transient are excluded from serialization. 
ObjectOutputStream and ObjectInputStream are used for writing and reading serialized objects 
respectively. 
3.5 NIO Fundamentals: Buffer, Channel, Selector 
Buffer 
A Buffer is a fixed-size container for primitive data (ByteBuffer, CharBuffer, IntBuffer, etc.). Data must 
be written to a buffer before being sent to a channel, or read from a buffer after being received from a 
channel. Every buffer has three key properties: capacity (maximum elements), position (index of next 
read/write), and limit (boundary of valid data). The flip() method switches a buffer from write mode to 
read mode. 
Channel 
A Channel represents an open connection to an I/O source or destination (file, socket, device). Unlike 
streams (which are one-directional), channels are bidirectional — they can both read and write. 
Channels always work in conjunction with Buffers. FileChannel is used for file I/O; SocketChannel and 
ServerSocketChannel are for network I/O. 
Selector 
A Selector allows a single thread to monitor multiple Channels simultaneously. It is the cornerstone of 
Java NIO's non-blocking I/O model. A Channel registers itself with a Selector specifying which I/O 
events it is interested in (connect, accept, read, write). The Selector's select() call blocks until at least 
one registered channel is ready, allowing one thread to serve many connections efficiently. 
3.6 IO vs. NIO Comparison 
Aspect 
Java I/O (java.io) 
Model 
Stream-oriented 
Java NIO (java.nio) 
Buffer-oriented 
Blocking 
Always blocking 
Non-blocking supported 
Directionality 
One-way streams 
Thread model 
Bidirectional channels 
One thread per connection 
Performance 
Lower for high concurrency 
One thread can manage many channels 
(Selector) 
Main classes 
Higher for servers/large file I/O 
InputStream, OutputStream, Reader, 
Writer 
Buffer, Channel, Selector, Path, Files 
Best for 
Simple apps, small files, console I/O 
4. Key Definitions 
Servers, large-scale file processing, 
network apps 
Serialization 
Converting an object's state into a byte stream for storage or transmission; requires 
implementing Serializable. 
Buffer 
(NIO) 
A fixed-size container for primitive-type data; has capacity, position, and limit 
properties. 
Channel 
(NIO) 
Bidirectional connection to an I/O source; works with Buffers; supports non-blocking 
I/O. 
Selector 
(NIO) 
Component that allows a single thread to monitor and manage multiple channels 
simultaneously. 
5. Exam Questions 
2-Mark Questions 
Q1. What is the difference between a Byte Stream and a Character Stream? 
Q2. What is serialization? Which interface must a class implement to support it? 
[2 Marks] 
[2 Marks] 
5-Mark Questions 
Q3. Compare Java I/O (java.io) and Java NIO (java.nio) in terms of their programming 
model, blocking behaviour, and use cases. Provide a table. 
10-Mark Questions 
Q4. Explain the Buffer-Channel-Selector architecture of Java NIO. Write a Java 
program demonstrating file reading using FileChannel and ByteBuffer. Also explain the 
Path interface and Files class with examples. 
[5 
Marks] 
[10 
Marks] 
6. Summary 
Java NIO provides high-performance I/O through its buffer-oriented, non-blocking model. The Path 
interface and Files class modernize file operations. Byte Streams handle binary data; Character 
Streams handle text. Serialization converts objects to byte streams for persistence or transfer. NIO's 
core architecture — Buffer (data container), Channel (bidirectional I/O link), and Selector (multiplexer) 
— enables efficient single-threaded management of multiple connections, making it ideal for high
concurrency applications. 
MODULE 10 — Collection Framework & Generics 
Module 10: Collection Framework & Generics 
1. Learning Objectives 
• Understand the structure and hierarchy of the Java Collection Framework. 
• Use List, Set, and Map implementations appropriately. 
• Choose the right collection class based on requirements. 
• Iterate through collections and perform sorting and searching. 
• Understand generics: generic classes, methods, bounded types, and wildcards. 
2. Introduction 
The Java Collection Framework (JCF) is a unified architecture that provides a set of interfaces and 
classes for storing, organizing, and manipulating groups of objects. Instead of writing custom data 
structures, developers use battle-tested, optimized implementations. The JCF reduces programming 
effort, improves code reuse, ensures type safety through Generics, and provides efficient algorithms 
for common operations like sorting and searching. 
3. Core Concepts 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  Collection hierarchy (List/Set/Map), comparison of 
implementations (ArrayList vs. LinkedList, HashMap vs. TreeMap) — very frequently tested. 
3.1 Collection Framework Hierarchy 
The root of the collection hierarchy is the Iterable interface, followed by the Collection interface. 
Collection is extended by three primary sub-interfaces: List (ordered, allows duplicates), Set 
(unordered, no duplicates), and Queue (ordered, FIFO typically). Map is a separate hierarchy — not a 
child of Collection — that stores key-value pairs. 
3.2 List Interface and Implementations 
Class 
Internal Structure 
Duplicates 
Access 
Thread-Safe 
ArrayList 
Dynamic array 
Yes 
Best For 
O(1) random 
access 
No 
Frequent reads, random 
access 
LinkedList 
Doubly linked list 
Yes 
O(n) sequential 
No 
Frequent insert/delete; 
also a Deque 
Vector 
Dynamic array 
Yes 
O(1) random 
access 
Yes 
(synchronized) 
Legacy; avoid in new 
code 
Stack Extends Vector Yes LIFO 
(push/pop) 
Yes Stack operations; prefer 
Deque 
 
3.3 Set Interface and Implementations 
Class Ordering Null 
Allowed 
Duplicates Thread-Safe Best For 
HashSet No guaranteed order One null No No Fast operations; order 
doesn't matter 
LinkedHashSet Insertion order 
maintained 
One null No No Unique elements 
preserving insertion order 
TreeSet Sorted (natural or 
Comparator) 
No No No Always-sorted unique 
elements 
 
3.4 Map Interface and Implementations 
Class Key Ordering Null Keys Null Values Thread-Safe Best For 
HashMap No ordering One null key Multiple nulls No Fast key-value 
storage; general use 
LinkedHashMap Insertion order One null key Multiple nulls No Cache with 
predictable iteration 
order 
TreeMap Sorted order No null key Multiple nulls No Sorted key-value data; 
range queries 
Hashtable No ordering No null key No null value Yes 
(synchronized) 
Legacy; use 
ConcurrentHashMap 
instead 
 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  List vs. Set vs. Map summary table and 'choose the right 
collection' scenario questions. 
 
3.5 Choosing the Right Collection — Real-World Scenarios 
Scenario Requirement Recommended Class 
User Registration System Unique usernames, fast 
lookups 
HashSet 
User Session History Order of login preserved LinkedHashSet 
Product Catalog Allow duplicates, random 
access 
ArrayList 
Task Queue FIFO processing LinkedList (as Queue) 
Undo/Redo in Editor LIFO stack operations Stack / ArrayDeque 
Employee Records ID → Employee object 
mapping 
HashMap 
LRU Cache Key-value, predictable 
eviction order 
LinkedHashMap 
Bank Transactions (sorted) 
Always sorted by timestamp 
TreeMap / TreeSet 
Thread-safe concurrent 
access 
Multi-threaded reads/writes 
ConcurrentHashMap 
3.6 Introduction to Generics 
Generics, introduced in Java 5, enable types (classes and interfaces) to be parameterized. Instead of 
operating on raw Object types (which require casting and are not type-safe), generics allow classes 
and methods to operate on any specified type while providing compile-time type checking. The type 
parameter is specified in angle brackets, e.g., List<String> creates a list that can only hold String 
objects. 
Generic Classes 
A generic class is declared with one or more type parameters in angle brackets after the class name 
(class Box<T>). Inside the class, T is used as a placeholder for the actual type that will be specified 
when the class is instantiated (Box<Integer> intBox = new Box<>()). 
Bounded Type Parameters 
Sometimes it is useful to restrict the types that can be used as type parameters. An upper-bounded 
wildcard restricts a type to be a specific class or any of its subclasses (class NumberBox<T extends 
Number>). A lower-bounded wildcard does the reverse. The wildcard symbol ? represents an unknown 
type (List<?> can hold a list of any type). 
Type Erasure 
Java implements generics through a mechanism called type erasure. The compiler uses generic type 
information to enforce type safety at compile time, but then removes (erases) all generic type 
information from the compiled bytecode. At runtime, generic types are replaced by their bounded types 
(or Object if unbounded). This ensures backward compatibility with older Java versions. 
4. Key Definitions 
Collection 
Framework 
A unified architecture of interfaces and classes in java.util for storing and 
manipulating groups of objects. 
List 
An ordered Collection that allows duplicate elements and provides index-based access. 
Set 
A Collection that does not allow duplicate elements; models the mathematical set abstraction. 
Map 
A key-value pair structure (not a subtype of Collection); keys are unique; values may be 
duplicated. 
Generics 
A mechanism in Java allowing classes and methods to operate on parameterized types, 
providing compile-time type safety. 
Type 
Erasure 
The process by which the compiler removes generic type information from bytecode 
after type checking, for backward compatibility. 
5. Important Points for Quick Revision 
• ArrayList: O(1) random access, O(n) insert/delete in middle. LinkedList: O(1) insert/delete, 
O(n) access. 
• HashSet: no order; LinkedHashSet: insertion order; TreeSet: sorted order. 
• HashMap: no order; LinkedHashMap: insertion order; TreeMap: sorted by key. 
• HashMap allows one null key and multiple null values. TreeMap does not allow null keys. 
Hashtable allows neither null keys nor null values. 
• Generics provide compile-time type checking; type erasure removes generic info at runtime. 
• Prefer ConcurrentHashMap over Hashtable/Collections.synchronizedMap for concurrent 
access. 
6. Common Mistakes Students Make 
• Using ArrayList for frequent insertions/deletions in the middle — LinkedList is more efficient 
for this. 
• Comparing objects with == instead of .equals() in collections — HashMap and HashSet use 
.equals() and hashCode() for equality. 
• Forgetting to override both hashCode() and equals() in custom objects used as HashMap 
keys. 
• Using raw types (List list) instead of parameterized types (List<String> list) — loses compile
time safety. 
7. Exam Questions 
2-Mark Questions 
Q1. What is the difference between ArrayList and LinkedList? When would you use 
each? 
[2 
Marks] 
Q2. What is the difference between HashSet, LinkedHashSet, and TreeSet? 
[2 Marks] 
Q3. What is type erasure in Java Generics? 
[2 Marks] 
5-Mark Questions 
Q4. Explain the Collection Framework hierarchy. Describe the key differences between 
List, Set, and Map interfaces. 
[5 
Marks] 
Q5. Write a Java program using HashMap to store and retrieve student records (roll 
number as key, name as value). Iterate using entrySet(). 
10-Mark Questions 
Q6. Write a Java program demonstrating the use of ArrayList, LinkedList, HashSet, 
TreeSet, HashMap, and TreeMap. For each, show insertion, deletion, and iteration. 
Explain the differences in ordering and performance. 
[5 
Marks] 
[10 
Marks] 
Q7. Explain Generics in Java. Write a generic class 'Pair<T, U>' that stores two values 
of potentially different types. Demonstrate bounded type parameters and wildcards. 
[10 
Marks] 
8. Summary 
The Java Collection Framework provides ready-made, type-safe data structures. List (ArrayList, 
LinkedList) maintains ordered, duplicate data. Set (HashSet, LinkedHashSet, TreeSet) enforces 
uniqueness with varying ordering. Map (HashMap, LinkedHashMap, TreeMap) stores key-value pairs. 
Choosing the right implementation depends on ordering needs, thread safety, null handling, and 
access patterns. Generics add compile-time type safety, and type erasure maintains backward 
compatibility. The JCF significantly reduces development effort for data-structure-intensive 
applications. 
PREDICTED LONG-ANSWER EXAM QUESTIONS 
Predicted Long-Answer Questions — University Exam 
Preparation 
Based on the syllabus coverage and typical university examination patterns, the following questions 
have a high probability of appearing in your end-semester examination. Study each topic thoroughly 
and practice writing structured answers. 
⭐ HIGH EXAM PROBABILITY TOPIC  |  Study these questions carefully — they cover the highest
weight topics in this course. 
Category 1: 10-Mark Questions (Most Probable) 
Q1. Explain the concept of inheritance in Java. With examples, describe single, 
multilevel, and hierarchical inheritance. Explain method overriding, the super keyword, 
and dynamic method dispatch. Show how runtime polymorphism is achieved. 
Q2. Write a Java program to demonstrate exception handling using try-catch-finally, 
throw, and throws. Create a custom checked exception 'InsufficientBalanceException' 
for a BankAccount class. Show exception propagation across three method levels. 
[10 
Marks] 
[10 
Marks] 
Q3. Explain the Java Collection Framework hierarchy. Write programs demonstrating 
ArrayList, HashSet, and HashMap. Provide a comparative table of List, Set, and Map 
interfaces. Explain when to choose each implementation. 
[10 
Marks] 
Q4. Compare Java I/O (java.io) and Java NIO (java.nio) with a detailed table. Explain 
Buffer, Channel, and Selector in NIO. Write a program using FileChannel and 
ByteBuffer to copy a file. 
[10 
Marks] 
Q5. Explain constructors in Java: default, parameterized, and overloaded. Show 
constructor chaining using this() and super(). Explain static blocks, instance initializer 
blocks, and their execution order relative to constructors. 
[10 
Marks] 
Category 2: 5-Mark Questions (Probable) 
Q6. Explain abstract class and interface in Java. Provide a comparison table. Write a 
program where an interface is implemented by two different classes and objects are 
processed polymorphically. 
[5 
Marks] 
 
Q7. Explain lambda expressions and functional interfaces in Java 8. Write a program 
using Predicate, Function, and Consumer to process a list of integers. 
[5 
Marks] 
 
Q8. Explain the Thread lifecycle in Java with a state diagram. Write a program creating 
two threads using the Runnable interface that print numbers 1–5 with a 500ms sleep 
between each. 
[5 
Marks] 
 
Q9. Compare String, StringBuffer, and StringBuilder. Write a program showing the 
immutability of String and mutability of StringBuilder. Benchmark the difference in a 
loop. 
[5 
Marks] 
 
Q10. Explain Generics in Java. Write a generic stack class (MyStack<T>) with push(), 
pop(), and isEmpty() methods. Demonstrate it with Integer and String types. 
[5 
Marks] 
 
Category 3: 2-Mark Questions (Certain) 
 
Q11. Define: (a) Encapsulation  (b) Polymorphism  (c) Abstraction  (d) Inheritance [2 Marks] 
 
Q12. What is the difference between method overloading and method overriding? [2 Marks] 
 
Q13. What is a marker interface? Give two examples. [2 Marks] 
 
Q14. What is the difference between == and .equals() for String comparison in Java? [2 Marks] 
 
Q15. What is the final keyword? Explain its use with variables, methods, and classes. [2 Marks] 
 
Study Strategy Recommendation 
Prioritize Modules 3, 5, 7, and 10 — they carry the highest weight in most OOP examinations. 
Write code on paper for practice since the university practical exam requires handwritten or 
terminal-executed code. Always include comments in your programs during exams to 
demonstrate understanding. 
 